# 002 GQ

Welcome again to vimnasium!  Today we are going to tackled a formatting command
that I just recently became aware of.  In fact, I learned about it while writing
the previous edition of Vimnasium.  After I had been writing for a paragraph or
so I decided that I'd like to wrap the article to a width of 80 characters.  In
order to do that I ran `set textwidth=80`, which worked a treat.  However, the
paragraph I had already written was still wrapped to max width.  So I looked for
a simple Vim solution, and found the perfect thing; `gq`.

# The Command

Using the command is quite simple.  To reformat the line below you can type:

```
# gq<movement>
gqj
```

This will apply the `textwidth` setting.  However, if you'd like to apply more
control you can.  The `gq` command will apply internal formatting only if
`formatexpr` and `formatprg` are not set.  We'll likely talk about those two
options in future articles, for now we'll focus on internal formatting.

The options `gq` accepts are listed in `fo-table` you can see this list by
typing:

```
:help fo-table
```

The list is quite extensive so I'll leave its reading as an exercise up to the
reader.  But let's go through one as an example.

The `a` flag stands for automatic paragraph formatting.  The idea here is when
you are editing text (say a markdown file) the formatting options, particularly
`textwidth` and `wrapmargin`, will be recalculated every time you enter insert
mode or delete a character.

## GW

The `gq` command leaves your cursor whever the movement you pass to it takes
you.  Frequently, you'll find yourself wanting to apply formatting to a range or
movement without worrying about where your cursor will end up.  Once again Vim
has your back. If you want all the same functionality of `gq` you can use `gw`.

```
# gw<movement>
gwj
```

And that's about all there is to it. Thanks for reading!
